I'm David Levitz welcome to the show in
Israel Mass rallies against the
government of Benyamin Netanyahu marked
the eve of the six-month anniversary of
the Hamas Terror attacks mounting anger
over the government's handling of the
war in Gaza brought tens of thousands
onto the streets of Tel Aviv and other
cities protesters demanded that Israel
agree to a deal with Hamas for the
release of the remaining hostages many
calling on prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu to step down some accused
Netanyahu and his Coalition of delaying
a hostage deal for political
reasons our correspondent Aman ISF sent
us this date from
Jerusalem thousands of Israelis have
taken its streets across the country to
demand the end of Netanyahu government
not just here in Jerusalem but also in
Tel Aviv and hia the thing that brings
them together is the fear for the safety
of Israel now we talked to several
people here and they said that they're
mostly concerned about the lives of the
hostages the hostages that remain in
Gaza under Hamas control they believe
that Netanyahu is not negotiating in
good faith to bring those hostages home
and especially with mounting pressure
from across the world on Israel with how
Israel is conducting the war in Gaza the
people here believe that Netanyahu has
made Israel less safe by alienating it
on an international stage
the protests come as Israel is
responding to international calls to
allow more humanitarian Aid into Gaza
the government has approved the
reopening of the arz Crossing into
Northern Gaza and the temporary use of
ashdod port in southern Israel Aid
agencies say not nearly enough supplies
are getting through to the Palestinian
territory and that famine is
imminent inside these boxes is medicine
and
supplies much needed Aid at this
Hospital which has become the most
important in Northern
Gaza after alifa Hospital stopped
functioning many patients arrived at
Kamal adwan hospital this is a small
hospital and we lack medicine and
supplies we call on International
organizations including the World Health
Organization and we thank God today that
we received some
supplies Aid has been trickling into
Gaza however agencies say it's not
enough to meet the needs of the
population pressure has been growing on
Israel to allow more humanitarian
supplies Into The Enclave which the
Israeli government has approved this
decision comes in the wake of the
killing of several Aid workers in an
Israeli strike earlier this week but
safety concerns remain an issue for
agencies still operating in Gaza we
don't have the ne necessary security
guarantees to work here the people also
need to be safe so for that for us to
really be able to scale up to avert
famine so that people don't have to die
because they don't have food we need
security guarantees for us as
humanitarians but also for the people we
serve in Gaza farman is edging closer in
Northern Gaza where some 70% of the
population is facing catastrophic hunger
according to the un's world food program
Oxfam says since January Palestinians in
Northern Gaza have eaten an average of
just 245 calories per day that's less
than a can of
beans when we were displaced at the
beginning of the war we used to eat
rotten bread because of the high food
prices this is the only place where I
can get anything for my children I have
three boys and a girl they need food
where do I get food
I can't afford to buy it everything is
so expensive and I have no money this
Local Kitchen is our safe place we come
here every
day a problem shared by many gazin 6
months into the war and with no end in
sight to their
suffering the US and Israel are on high
alert expecting retaliation for the
bombing of Iran's Embassy in Damascus on
Monday after funerals for seven members
of the Revolutionary guard who were
killed Iran warned that it reserves the
right to quote take a decisive response
Tran says Israeli War plans were used in
what it considers a major escalation in
Israel's war with its Regional
adversaries benam benali is a senior
fellow at the foundation for defense of
democracies Research Institute in
Washington DC he focuses on Iranian
political and security issues benam good
to have you with us
Iran has promised what it calls severe
Revenge what exactly could that
mean well it's great to be with you
we've seen the clerical regime in Iran
promise something similar before uh for
example in response to real or perceived
threats from Israel in 2022 and again in
2024 uh the regime ended up striking
publicly from its own territory um
Targets in Iraq that ended up being the
homes of Kurdish businessmen K killing
innocent civilians alleging that those
targets were mosad bases uh in the past
the Islamic Republic uh has been
increasingly uh interested and willing
and able uh to publicly launch missile
operations the more capable they have
become but thus far in its history it
has never directly targeted Israeli
territory publicly from its own
territory uh using these weapons so what
is the risk of us seeing a full out
Regional War
now there's certainly the risk but
looking at uh Iranian commentary
particular within the past 48 hours
while there is talk of quote unquote a
slap against Israel and lots of
political and security and military
officials on a recently manufactured
Iranian holiday called KS day the other
day which is held on the last Friday of
the holy month of Ramadan uh between
their commentary if you kind of read
between the lines uh was a lot about how
Iran felt emboldened because it felt
like it was already winning in the
battle fields to the post October 7
Middle East so my assessment is that
Iran is likely not going to do something
uh to shake off the current trajectory
so that might mean not targeting Israel
directly or again launching an attack
against a third party country or more
likely you've even had Iranian political
officials talk about terrorism against
Israeli
embassies so what capacity would Iran
though have to hurt
Israel uh it broadly depends on how one
defines hurts I mean uh within the past
48 hours you've had Iranian news
agencies actually admit that this
Brigadier General that was killed in the
Damascus strike Brigadier General zahedi
uh allegedly partook or helped plan uh
the October 7 terrorist attack which is
an eerie slip of the tongue given Ton's
denials for the past six months uh so
clearly they have a robust terrorist
apparatus in the past the Israelis and
the Iranians have traded barbs in
cyberspace that could potentially
continue as well it's also an open
question because tan was pointing a
finger at America despite the very
public American denial um if it will
resume militia attacks in the heartland
of the Middle East like in Iraq and
Syria against us positions in your
assessment just briefly what could be
done right now to deescalate the the
situation if
anything you know listen this this is a
really tough question because I think
the Iranians at this point in time were
politically locked in uh they've sunk a
lot of costs publicly and rhetorically
about uh feeling the need to respond the
question is how will they intend to save
face here and what can the west and
Israel others do to bolster deterrence
to limit any kind of potential Iranian
response Ben I'm Ben Tali blue senior
fellow at the foundation for defense of
democracy thank you so much for your
time and your
analysis we now would like to get some
more on this Potential Threat from Iran
and for that I'm joined by hin yakob
Schindler he's senior director of the
counter extremism project which is an
international non-governmental
organization welcome to DW so Iran has
promised what it calls severe Revenge
are we about to see a full out Regional
War thank you so much for having me I I
don't think that a severe Revenge that
Iran has promised the US for example
also in the aftermath of General Solani
is necessarily coming in the way that
everyone imagines so everyone of course
justifiably because you cannot 100%
excluding it is looking at air strikes
into Israel however has many more
opportunity toties to respond and I
think the most obvious way is really to
go back to the old Playbook on how Iran
responded in the past and that is
looking at attacking installations in
this case Israeli or even us
installations outside the region
worldwide there were attacks for example
in 2012 in Bas Bulgaria against Israeli
tourists that I think is where the
threat lies should Iran attack Israeli
ter proper by itself not via hisbah this
would really put a lot of water on those
uh in t Aviv as well as in Washington
who argue for direct attacks against
Iran already and hence this is not in
the Iranian interest well talk to us a
bit about these proxies you mentioned
hisbah this is the largest and best
armed non uh governmental force in the
world if I'm not mistaken what is its
capacity to really hurt Israel um on
behalf of
Iran we've already seen the last couple
of months crossb attacks on a daily
basis around 80,000 Israelis in the
North of Israel have not been living in
their homes since the last six month
this is a real pressure also on the
Israeli economy and a political pressure
on the government but Isa is much more
than that missa has a global truck
distribution and transporting Network
that finances in part the go hisbah has
quite a lot of economic interests around
the world and hisbah has an attack
Network structure every single attack in
the last several decades that Iran
initiated had some element of hisbah
operatives behind it I.E normally the
strategic planning the organization on
the ground was done by irgc or pastan
offic off offices um sometimes even
based in the embassies in the in the
country but the operatives who actually
planted the bomb who killed the
individuals the these were Isa
operatives so hisbah is for all intents
and purposes if needed also an
additional foreign attack Network for
the Islamic Republic of Iran and if as
you suggest this retaliation may even
take place outside of the Middle East um
possibly in some other country and some
other continent is there anything that
can be done to deescalate the situation
right
now well at the moment it's really hot
we are in a super tense situation not
only do you have the Gaza situation
continuing we have thepa attacking
Northern israels we have renewed attacks
of Iraqi groups and Syrian groups on us
installations over the last couple of
days we have the houthi problem in the
Red Sea all of this creates a very
difficult T situation to diffuse the
regime in Teran of course after the
death now of a really high ranking
general who was also the alasan PO
person between Iranian forces in Syria
and hisbah and hispa forces that operate
in Syria on the behest of Assad um in
the embassy of tan uh in in Syria is a
really really difficult political thing
and they will have to react
unfortunately in some shape or form that
was Hans yakob Schindler senior director
of the counter extremism project many
thanks
indeed